# Assignment1
Square is What Will Make the World Go Round

The name of the company I chose to write a case study on is the digital payment platform, Square, which as of December 1st, 2021, rebranded itself as Block. Dorsey, who recently stepped down from his other giant tech company, Twitter, was inspired when his friend was unable to complete a transaction for his small business as he could not accept credit cards (PYMNTS.com). This friend was James McKelvey who became the cofounder of Square alongside Dorsey. Square was incorporated in 2009 in St. Louis, Missouri not too long after they decided to do something about the problem (Investopedia). 
On November 19, 2015, Square had its IPO on the New York Stock Exchange with a valuation around $3 billion. Square now has a market cap of around $100 billion. According to Crunchbase, Square has received $601.2M in funding over 11 rounds in 11 years. There first ever funding was in January 2010. 
Below is a breakdown of their funding investors from Crunchbase.
Series A funding from Khosla Ventures - 2010
Series B funding from Sequoia Capital - 2011
Series C funding from Kleiner Perkins - 2011
Series D funding from Citi Ventures, Rizvi Traverse Management, and Starbucks - 2012
Series E funding from Goldman Sachs, Rizvi Traverse Management, and GIC Private Limited – 2014 
Square’s goal, according to the Motley Fool is “to democratize commerce.”  Square first launched with a credit card reader that could plug into mobile phones to help small businesses accept credit cards. But over the past decade, Square has innovated the digital payment process for all different sized corporations. Square launched many different products for mobile phones and tablets as technology has evolved. Square now provides payment processing, analytics, and lending capital to merchants now as well (Motley Fool). Square prides itself on the relationship they have with small to medium-sized business communities and it has often been referred to as an operating system for small business. Square’s main customers have been businesses with annualized gross payment volume of less than $125,000. “Most of the sellers that use our services are small businesses, many of which are in the early stages of their development…,” the company wrote in its S-1 filing (VentureBeat and SEC). According to CSI Market, due to strong revenue growth of 26.73 % in 3Q21 Square Inc improved its market share, to approximate 5.47 %. Square’s valuation is currently over $100 billion dollars. According to the Motley Fool, there are about 20 million businesses in the U.S. that have $6 trillion in gross receipts. Square has carved out a piece of this giant pie for themselves in less than a decade.
Square has a marketplace, software, card reader, POS system, and a lending platform. They have become a one stop shop platform to meet all needs for their growing clientele. They have acquired several companies ranging from tax services, food delivery services, and money lending platforms to expand as they cater to different sectors. Square faces fierce competition from companies like PayPal, Verifone, Microsoft, Oracle, Venmo, as well as the traditional credit card companies like American Express, Mastercard, and Visa. Their low fees and simple user friendly platforms have helped them carve out there growing market share.   
Square is the company it is today due to its use of NFC. NFC stands for “near field communication.” It’s the technology that allows smartphones and payment readers to communicate, and it enables secure, contactless payments like Apple Pay or Google Pay—transactions that require no physical contact between the payment device and the payment reader (SquareUp). This was essential for faster and more importantly, safer, payments. I found an in-depth breakdown of the Square ecosystem on the Motley Fool. Square’s Payments & POS ecosystem includes register, hardware, analytics, employee management, cash, invoices, appointments, online store, and an app marketplace. Square has made some key strategic acquisitions to bulk up their business. On SquareUp.com, Square’s blog, they speak directly to their community and update them on news. In 2019, Square announced that it had acquired Eloquent Labs, an artificial intelligence startup helping improve the customer service experience. Several months later in early 2020, Square announced that it had acquired Dessa, a Toronto-based deep learning company that “addresses significant real-world challenges for all types of businesses. Their team of world-class engineers will immediately bolster our machine learning and artificial intelligence capabilities at Square” (SquareUp). 
Square has positioned itself to be in several domains in the finance industry. This includes finance, banking, loans, money, accounting, and tax. Square did not start out in all these sectors but overtime they grew to fit their customers’ needs and acquired several different companies to expand their empire. I chose to focus solely on Square and their initial core company, but they have expanded into ventures like Cash, Tidal, Caviar, and now cryptocurrencies. My father is a small business owner and I have learned from him how tedious, stressful, and complicated, and quite frankly, intimidating, it is to run a business. I believe that Square clearly catered to this need and helped simplify the intimidation factor of the financial side of running a business. Another trend and innovation were mobile payments. Food trucks, pop up shops, farmers markets all now have access to the latest technology on the go, no matter where they are. Square met the need for businesses that don’t have the standard business front. The food trucks that sit outside my office all now use Square. The tech giant has now also ventured into the ever-expanding world of crypto. Square has Bitcoin on its balance sheet and with the Cash App, they have now made it easy to trade cryptos. The possibilities are endless as these technologies are adopted and utilized. Verifone, Venmo, traditional banks, and traditional credit cards are what comes to mind when I think of major companies in this domain. Square has its hands in so many pockets that it is hard to find a company that they do not compete with in some capacity. 
	The business impact that Square has had on the world is revolutionary. Square’s processing system allowed small business to accept credit card payments when they had little to no other options. They opened the doors to allow vendors of all kinds to use the service to help grow and run their businesses (Business Degrees). According to Investopedia, Square's FY 2020, was a profitable year but not as profitable as 2019. Net income fell 43.2% to $213.1 million in FY 2020. Total revenue for the year was $9.5 billion, up 101.5% compared to the previous year. Gross profit rose 44.6% to $2.7 billion (Investopedia). A few of the metrics Square uses to measure success is how many dollars’ worth of payments they handle and how many users they have. Over 2 million merchants use Square and 210 million buyer profiles have used Square (Statista). PayPal has over 29 million merchants using their platform and almost 337 million users (Business of Apps). Square has successfully disrupted the market and is growing every single year. They have very competitive fees, if not lower, the hardware is usually less expensive, the monthly payments are reasonable, and the cloud service and analytics are second to none. 
Square is diving deep into crypto. So much so, that they rebranded the company to Block. Last year, Dorsey put about 1% of Square’s total assets into Bitcoin. The $50 million dollar investment bought them almost 5,000 Bitcoins. Dorsey tweeted on August 9th, 2021, “Bitcoin will unite a deeply divided county. (and eventually: world)” (Twitter). Dorsey is very vocal on Twitter and in interviews about his support for Bitcoin. I believe the next products and services should be in the metaverse. I feel that Square’s digital payment platform can help create businesses in the metaverse. There are endless possibilities with gaming, purchasing, and entrepreneurship inside the digital world. There will be a ton of merchants and opportunities to produce income in the metaverse and Square has all the resources to integrate their tech. I believe integrating Square into the metaverse would be beneficial for all users because it is a large company that people trust and are familiar with. If I was in the metaverse, I would be hesitant to use my credit card or crypto wallet to purchase anything. But because of Square’s reputation and alignment with crypto, I would trust a merchant who used Square to secure digital payments and transactions. Square would not necessarily need just new technologies, but they would need to create new partnerships and alliances with companies in the metaverse. Meta, Microsoft, gaming platforms, and other companies that are building the metaverse will be essential for traction. With these alliances, all parties will benefit: the platform creator, Square, and the customer can become more confident in the new terrain. Security of the transactions will be a top priority so an additional technology Square would need to implement is an even higher degree of protection. Square currently operates Square Secure which is a set of services and tools they provide to keep accounts safe. They even include live transaction monitoring, and they send alerts via email (SquareUp). The blockchain would be a great way to do this to make transactions more transparent. Blockchain technology is already also being integrated with the Cash app which could be utilized in the metaverse. 
	
	In conclusion, Square is a force to reckon with that has an extremely bright future ahead of them. With Dorsey stepping aside from Twitter, and the rebrand of Block, there seems to be a reignited focus on this giant tech firm in the crypto space. As we digitize more, Square has positioned themselves as a trusted, secure, and user-friendly platform that resonates with the masses. I am really looking forward to watching how this company evolves over the next few years. 












Work Cited:

https://www.investopedia.com/articles/tech/021017/square.asp 

https://www.pymnts.com/mpos-tracker/2017/square-jack-dorsey-cash-capital-first-data-vantiv-paypal-uk-apple-pay-debit-pymnts-mpos-tracker-mobile-payments-mobile-point-of-sale/ 

https://venturebeat.com/2015/10/18/squares-success-story-in-two-words-small-businesses/#:~:text=Since%202011%2C%20Square's%20main%20customers,in%20its%20S%2D1%20filing. 

https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/square/company_financials 

https://www.wired.com/2014/07/exclusive-square-bets-big-on-next-gen-credit-card-tech/ 

https://www.fool.com/investing/general/2016/04/09/understanding-squares-business-model.aspx 

https://www.fastcompany.com/90253151/square-takes-on-the-clunky-old-school-payment-terminal 
https://businessdegrees.uab.edu/blog/how-square-revolutionized-payment-processing/#:~:text=Square's%20portable%2C%20pocket%2Dsized%20credit,how%20the%20world%20does%20business.
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1512673/000119312515343733/d937622ds1.htm 
https://www.statista.com/topics/3242/square/ 
https://www.fool.com/investing/2021/09/03/squares-160-billion-market-opportunity-and-how-it/ 
https://expandedramblings.com/index.php/square-statistics/ 
https://squareup.com/us/en/press/dessa-joins-square 
https://www.businessofapps.com/data/paypal-statistics/ 
https://squareup.com/help/us/en/article/6159-protect-yourself-from-scams-and-fraud#:~:text=Square%20Secure%2C%20the%20set%20of,ll%20alert%20you%20via%20email. 
